advanced_sql_questions = """
# 📌 Advanced SQL Business Questions for Employee Analytics

1. What is the average age of employees by department?
2. What is the distribution of employees across employment types and departments?
3. Which department has the highest average performance rating for full-time employees?
4. Identify employees with base salary higher than their department's average.
5. What is the gender pay gap per department?
6. What is the employee count by work shift and employment status?
7. Identify departments with more than 50% of employees working night shifts.
8. Which job titles have the highest turnover (resigned or terminated employees)?
9. What is the average length of service for employees who resigned?
10. Find the department with the most consistent performance (lowest std dev in rating).
11. What percentage of employees received an annual bonus above 10% of base salary?
12. List employees with performance rating above 4 and annual bonus below 5,000.
13. What are the top 3 cities with the highest concentration of skilled employees (count by skill)?
14. What is the median base salary across different marital statuses?
15. Calculate the number of employees hired each year for the past 5 years.
16. What is the correlation between base salary and annual bonus across departments?
17. Identify employees whose hiring anniversary is this month.
18. What is the retention rate by department in the past year?
19. Which departments have the most multilingual employees?
20. Identify managers (employees with subordinates) and count how many report to them.
21. What is the average performance rating by country and work shift?
22. What percentage of employees are eligible for retirement in the next 5 years (age >= 60)?
23. List employees who have been promoted in the past 2 years (requires promotion_date column).
24. Compare salary and bonus by gender in IT and Finance departments.
25. Who are the top 10 highest earners (salary + bonus) in each job title?
26. How many employees have the same skill but are in different departments?
27. Find out which employment type has the highest satisfaction rating (requires satisfaction column).
28. Create a distribution of employees by age brackets (e.g., 20–29, 30–39, etc.).
29. What is the attrition rate (resigned + terminated) over total employees by department?
30. Identify duplicate emails or phone numbers if any (data quality check).

---

These questions are ideal for building dashboards, reports, and predictive models using SQL, Excel, Power BI
"""
